[Music]
welcome to topcast
chapter 17 unsustainable from the
beginning of infinity series
this is part four of that particular
chapter and will be the last we will get
through to the end of the chapter today
possibly a little longer than the
previous chapter and next time i'll be
back in my
studio where i can do the final chapter
called the beginning but for now for a
few parts now
we've been talking about the easter
islanders but let's read the final part
about
easter island the combination if you
like of their civilization their
primitive civilization
david writes we do not know what horrors
the easter island civilization
perpetuated
in the course of preventing progress but
apparently
its fall did not improve anything indeed
the fall of tyranny is never enough the
sustained creation of knowledge depends
also
on the presence of certain kinds of idea
particularly
optimism and an associated tradition of
criticism
that would have to be social and
political institutions that incorporated
and protected such traditions a society
in which
some degree of dissent and deviation
from the norm was tolerated
and whose educational practices did not
entirely extinguish
creativity none of that is trivially
achieved
western civilization is the current
consequence of achieving it
which is why as i said it already has
what it takes to avoid an easter island
disaster
if it really is facing a crisis it must
be some other crisis
if it ever collapses it will be in some
other way
and if it needs to be saved it will have
to be by its own
unique methods pause there my reflection
now at the end of the last chapter i was
kind of riffing on the idea of
civilization being this
unfathomably complicated
system that we have
we know contains inexplicit knowledge
okay certainly
our western civilization contains
inexplicit knowledge of
how to maintain stability while
undergoing great change we don't know
all the reasons why
this happens why we're able to maintain
peace and relative harmony
relatively good wealth creation
relatively
fast knowledge creation we're able to
come up with vaccines and new
technologies
relatively quickly certainly at a rate
unprecedented throughout human history
but we don't know all the ways in which
this happens and
i neglected to refer to david deutsch's
excellent
analogy of this way of viewing a
civilization
with people being on a submarine and he
mentioned this in one of his
podcasts with sam harris and it's a
wonderful analogy and he basically said
look people who want to upend
western civilization who want to tinker
with
the long-standing institutions which
maintain stability
they don't know what they're doing it's
basically like
they are passengers on an extremely
technologically advanced
underwater nuclear-powered submarine but
they don't know that they're on a
nuclear-powered submarine
instead they think they're on a yacht or
some other kind of boat
and they want to open up all the hatches
in order to get a better view
okay so that's the situation that we're
kind of in
we are all of us passengers on this
submarine passengers
on this amazingly sophisticated
complicated
piece of societal level technology
call it a civilization call it western
civilization and there are some people
who
just ignore the fact that it has taken a
long time
lots of philosophers leaders
scientists people a culture gradually
evolving gradually trying things out
finding out what doesn't work
and preserving those things that work
and enable the civilization
to remain stable over time these
traditions especially these traditions
of criticism
are so important and so under
appreciated that many people think that
well the problems we've got in society
are so bad
it's because of the society and so we
need to undo society in order to
improve it have a revolution burn
everything to the ground
start again well this is entirely
ludicrous it's the wrong way of going
about things we don't know
we don't know how to maintain stability
progress moral ethical
legal and scientific progress
without the kind of institutions that we
have slowly and painfully
managed to create manage to
evolve over time through difficult trial
and error
because the the the historical state of
things
i wouldn't like to say the natural state
of things the natural state of things is
us striving to improve things
but historically the state of humanity
has been
tribal and violent and not making any
progress and everyone being just
mired in poverty and disease and if we
did
burn everything to the ground that's
what we should expect
would come back again it would be the
hellscape it would be
the kind of thing that david is about to
talk about that certain intellectuals
think already is going to happen it's
not going to happen unless people
deliberately try to undo the
institutions and traditions that we have
and traditions are very very important
i've heard some um
quite prominent and influential
intellectuals that i respect on many
other matters
dismissing the importance and indeed the
centrality
of tradition within our culture within
western culture
tradition is just so important the way
in which we have done things hitherto
it's not to say that those traditions
cannot be improved or should not be
improved but they should be only
incrementally improved slowly improved
let's take away one part we don't
particularly like replace it with
something that we think might be better
but let's be careful about it
and be very reasonable in our criticism
of whether or not
that change has affected an improvement
an objective improvement or not
because what we might find is many of
these traditions that people might think
are silly quirks of just historical
accident
might contain within them important
inexplicit knowledge about how to ensure
that everyone can
coexist peacefully and continue to make
the kind of
progress and improvements that we have
become accustomed to that is indeed our
tradition
let's think of one i'll give you one the
institution of marriage the traditional
institution of marriage
some people want to undo it or some
people want to apply it to
an entire spectrum of different
relationships this is very dangerous
the tradition of marriage has gradually
evolved
over time and improved over time slowly
now
we might think that either doing away
with the institution of marriage
altogether might improve things
or allowing anyone to marry anything
might improve things as well why not why
not be free well that would undermine
what has
traditionally been the institution of
marriage i'm not saying the institution
of marriage
needs to be kept in the same way that it
has been for the last thousand years
but if we're going to tinker with
something like that we do it at our
peril
to some extent and we need to be very
careful
carefully calibrate the changes that we
make to marriage and have a look
after a few years if we change this
particular part of marriage this way in
which marriage works
let's see how it works let's reflect
let's not keep changing changing
changing changing marriage until such
time as
families and societies communities begin
to fall apart and only then
in retrospect we look back and go
perhaps we shouldn't have
completely undone what we thought of as
marriage maybe that was a bad
turn this is the sense in which certain
kinds of traditions
are important to preserve even if we
think
that that institution might have aspects
which are
prejudiced or discriminatory sure we
don't want to discriminate against
people
we might want to change certain
institutions but let's
do it slowly via an incremental
evolutionary process rather than a
completely
revolutionary one one which undoes
what for so long the overwhelming
majority of people have thought of as an
important tradition
and that's just what that's just
illustrative it's not meant to
be brett hall's opinion
on the way in which the institution of
marriage
needs to be kept in exactly the same way
forevermore
merely saying that the institution of
marriage
has worked in
a certain way to a certain extent for a
long time in order to enable
for example families which are an
important unit
within communities and then broader
civilization
to ensure that children are for example
raised well it doesn't mean that they
can't re-raise better of course
children can be raised better but doing
away with certain institutions that have
allowed society hitherto
to raise children well well as a
relative term
should not be toyed with should not be
used as a
political football in order to allow
different sides who want to either
maintain the status quo forever more
or to completely upend and revolutionize
things
in some sense we need this tension my
only point there is that
traditions are important even if we
personally individually
or even as a large group sometimes can't
see how even if we can't see how the
institution is important
we need to think very carefully about
undoing the institution
just because we can find single problems
with the institution doesn't mean the
entire institution
needs to be thrown in the bin
metaphorically speaking okay let's go
back to the book and
i just want to flag here that we're
about to come to one of my favorite
anecdotes in the book
i think i like to call it the parable of
europium
and it's a wonderful example of
all the ways in which people who
argue that resources are going to run
out
ignore the fact that it's not so much
about particular resources running out
as about knowledge being scarce and at
the same time
ignorance being this infinitely deep
well from which people draw
their ignorance and then conclude on the
basis of their ignorance that therefore
disaster is going to come that disaster
is going to strike because they're
ignorant of all the ways in which
that resource might not run out or might
be easily replaced by something else
okay so let's go back to the book and
here david is
about to talk about when he was at high
school and so i'll have some remarks
about this
comparing it to present day high school
okay and david writes
in 1971 while i was still at school
i attended a lecture for high school
students entitled population
resources environment it was given by
the population scientist
paul ehrlich i do not remember what i
was expecting
i don't think i'd ever heard of the
environment before but nothing had
prepared me
for such a bravara display of raw
pessimism
just pausing there and uh my reflection
on that
i guess that david would be absolutely
horrified with what goes on in schools
now and no doubt
he has some knowledge no doubt people
watching this have some knowledge
i have a little bit of inside knowledge
today
children do not need visiting experts
to scare them about how their futures
are basically some
apocalyptic hellscape they don't need
visiting experts because
their teachers do that and not now and
again
it's basically daily or weekly they're
getting it from
every corner in geography class they
will talk about
all the impacts on population of
population
all the impacts on communities of
pollution and of all the ways in which
resources are being depleted and are
about to run out
in science class they understand how
carbon dioxide is heating up the planet
and
causing the melting of the polar ice
caps this is a huge part of the
curriculum for
for a a rather esoteric part of science
it forms a vast amount it consumes a
vast amount of
science curriculum it's looked at from
all angles
and of course there's the moral aspect
there as well in science class
even mathematics does not escape
mathematics class in in many places does
indeed consist of
uh the rates at which for example you
might have a study of the rates at which
the polar ice caps are melting or the
rate at which the temperature is
increasing
or the rate at which uh there's
deforestation going on
and and of course it's all cash in terms
of this is the fault
of people okay this is the fault of
human beings simply existing and that
previous generations have caused this
damage and it's going to be left to the
children to
try and fix the damage but there's
little hope of that because we don't
talk about the solutions of course so
it's just an
anti-human anti-technology certainly
anti-energy
anti-so-called waste especially plastics
view of the world so david got this
once from a visiting scientist
and students today get something similar
every day or
every week from their teachers
uh now and again of course they might
have a guest come in to say how it's
much worse than what they've been
learning
um let's i smile and smirk a little bit
but it is
quite disgusting and terrible
to be honest then putting aside concerns
about
whether or not um schools need to exist
in their
present form it would be wonderful if
there was just
a a a little optimism
somewhere or other even the traditional
parts of schooling even if you go to a
religious school you will still
encounter this and of course we know
that religions
like for example the catholic church are
pivoting that's the that's the modern
word are pivoting towards
a pessimistic view of humanity even an
institution
otherwise other and other an institution
otherwise concerned with the sacredness
and
the uniqueness of human beings beginning
to talk about the evils
of human beings okay back to the book
ehrlich starkly described to his young
audience
the living hell we would be inheriting
half a dozen varieties of resource
management catastrophe
were just around the corner and it was
already too late to avoid some of them
people would be starving to death by the
billion in 10 years
20 at best raw materials were running
out the vietnam war then in progress was
a last ditch
struggle for the region's tin rubber and
petroleum
notice how his biogeographical
explanation blindly shrugged off the
political disagreements that were in
fact causing the conflict
the troubles of the day in american
inner cities rising crime mental illness
all were a part of the same great
catastrophe
just pausing there first just notice
that list
it could easily be drawn from the
newspapers today so this is back in 1971
all the problems with american inner
cities i mean i i
i never stopped hearing about how
terrible
terrible things are in los angeles and
this portends the end times apparently
and of course right now we're supposedly
in the midst
of a mass extinction of a kind
the holocene extinction as it's called
all due to us
we are the murderers we are genocidal
species level genocidal a virus of a
kind we just spread out
across the planet wiping out other
species this is
seemingly what we are and this is what
is what is taught
to students um they do learn about the
current great extinction events
and caused by us i mean how evil can we
be we are just
irredeemably evil on this view back to
the book
all were linked by ehrlich to
overpopulation
pollution and the reckless overuse of
finite resources
we had created too many power stations
and factories
and mines and intensive farms too much
economic growth
far more than the planet could sustain
and worst of all
too many people the ultimate source of
all the other ills
in this respect erlich was following in
the footsteps of malthus
making the same error setting
predictions
of one process against prophecies of
another
thus he calculated that if the united
states was to sustain even its 1971
standard of living
it would have to reduce its population
by three-quarters
to 50 million which was of course
impossible in the time available
the planet as a whole was overpopulated
by a factor of seven he said
even australia was nearing its maximum
sustainable population
and so on pause there my reflection so i
have an article inspired by this
called cosmological economics which i've
kind of turned into
a video which you can find on my my
channel there
or the cosmological economics you just
google that and it typically comes up
now under my name and it's precisely
about this we have this
fellow in australia the paul ehrlich of
australia if you like
his name is dick smith he runs a chain
of electronic stores and
he's otherwise a reasonably good science
popularizer but
like everyone else of our age almost
he's a terrible pessimist and a prophet
and he speaks in exactly these kind of
terms that australia is overpopulated
if you've been to australia especially
if you've flown in over the top of
australia you will see
that it is very hard to even spot a
community
let alone the overpopulation the place
is barren
it is barren it's largely a desert
uh although not entirely even the desert
parts
become green uh almost every year
we have rains out there in the desert we
were constantly being told we're in a
drought there were floods recently by
the way
it simply isn't the case that the earth
is overpopulated
these claims of overpopulation are
typically relying on the assumption that
no new knowledge will be created and the
rate at which we are consuming resources
will remain the same as the population
increases it's the same old malthusian
argument but
population increases exponentially
resource consumption
increases linearly we're not going to
find any new resources we're not going
to solve any new problems
we're not going to we're just going to
run out of the resources we have we're
going to begin to starve
so on et cetera et cetera it's been said
for centuries
it is tiresome for
optimists generation after generation
after generation to encounter these same
people
to win the argument but for no one to
ever notice that the argument has been
won
many times before this is my pessimist
coming out
even though paul ehrlich has gone even
though dick smith will go as well
even though grethenberg and the people
who
inspired her or follow her uh will go
there will be more there will be more
that will come
and so the debate never seems to be won
because it's a powerful argument and
people have to learn
the refutation of the argument as well
and so it is this arms race between
the people who argue the resources are
going to run out
and can point to all these scientific
ways in which it is clear the resource
is going to run out
and the optimists coming along and say
we understand that argument however it's
flawed for reasons xyz
namely we're going to solve those
problems we're going to create the
knowledge we're going to find new
resources we're going to be able to
sustain
more people on the planet we're going to
be able to support more people on the
planet at a higher standard of living
than ever before
try and explain what's going on
throughout history that's the story of
history and there's a reason
why things get better because we
continue
to improve a lot because we live in a
culture of criticism where we literally
do
improve things we do solve our problems
we aren't
simply a product of our environment we
shape the environment around us
this is a complicated argument i i
realize that it's a subtle
argument and so it's seemingly going to
be the case that we had just have to
keep defending
this thesis again and again and again
and explaining it and hopefully at some
point we achieve escape velocity
and we leave behind the pessimists as a
small minority of naysayers
at the moment they're still in the
ascendancy they're still in the majority
they still control the culture
control the media control politics to a
great extent
but there's light because more and more
people are coming on board and it
becomes
just impossible to deny the reality
of improving standards improving
technology
the fact that we were able to come up
with a vaccine
to what would have otherwise been a
terrible
global pandemic that killed far more
people than what it had
in a much shorter amount of time than it
did but our knowledge
was able to solve that problem and it
will continue to solve problems
at an ever faster rate into the future
we'll never run out of problems
and we'll never run out of resources
that's the optimistic part the
pessimistic part is
we just have to keep on having the
argument for a long time yet
okay let's go back to the book david's
talking about how he's
sitting in school listening to the
visiting professor
and he writes quote we had little basis
for doubting what the professor was
telling us about the field he was
studying
yet for some reason our conversation
afterwards was not that of a group of
students
who had just had their futures stolen i
do not know about the others
but i can remember when i stopped
worrying at the end of the lecture
a girl asked erlick a question i've
forgotten the details
but it had the form what if we solve one
of the problems that erlick had
described
within the next few years wouldn't that
affect your conclusion
erlich's reply was brisk how could we
possibly solve it
she did not know and even if we did how
could that do more than briefly delay
the catastrophe
and what would we do then what a relief
once i realized that ehrlich's
prophecies amounted to saying
if we stop solving problems we are
doomed i no longer found them shocking
for how could it be otherwise quite
possibly that girl went on to solve the
very problem she asked about
and the one after it at any rate someone
must have
because the catastrophe scheduled for
1991 has still not materialized
nor have any of the others that ehrlich
foretold
pausing near my reflection so it looks
as though
david deutsch when he was in high school
was the first
optimist in the sense that david deutsch
talks about optimism
right there where he says if we stop
solving problems we are doomed he was no
longer worried
because how could it be otherwise so he
understood even then
that we would just continue to solve
problems so we don't have to worry
because
if someone says how can we possibly
solve that
if they don't know it doesn't matter
someone will solve it someone's going to
put their mind to that
and they will come up with a solution we
don't want to
not solve certain problems especially at
a civilization level
destroying problems we're going to turn
our minds to it so
don't worry um we're going to get
through
david deutch understood that then back
to the book erlich thought that he was
investigating a planet's
physical resources and predicting their
rate of decline
in fact he was prophesying the content
of future knowledge
and by envisaging a future in which only
the best knowledge of 1971 was deployed
he was implicitly assuming that only a
small and rapidly dwindling set of
problems
would ever be solved again furthermore
by casting problems in terms of
resource depletion and ignoring the
human level explanation
he missed all the important determinants
of what he was really trying to predict
namely did the relevant people and
institutions have what it takes to solve
problems
and more broadly what does it take to
solve problems
okay so just pausing there my reflection
here
we've been at pains to point out
throughout this series
that resources in the in the general
sense in the broad sense
are not infinite of course you know pick
any one resource like naturally
occurring crude oil
it's going to be finite because the
planet is finite and as far as we know
there's no other oil out there in the
universe
as far as we know so particular
resources are going to be finite
but far more important factor is that
our knowledge
is the scarce resource that we need
whether we know
how to replace the oil once it's run out
or once it's running out
that's the important thing and how for
example we might
mitigate problems that oil creates along
the way of course oil solves
more problems than it creates far more
problems and the problems that it
creates are far better problems to want
to solve
than the problem that the oil solved in
the first place namely
keeping people warm helping us to
generate electricity helping us to get
from a to b
faster than we ever have before these
are really really important problems to
solve
and along the way oil creates a few
little problems it creates some
pollution
and we can solve those problems of
but simply turning off the supply of oil
because we're concerned about the
problems that it causes
it causes way worse problems than it
solves and forcing someone to replace
oil before they're ready to before it's
cheap enough for them to do so
is likewise a recipe for increased
suffering
so ultimately for any one resource of
course
it might run out but ultimately the
resources won't run out it has to be the
case into the future we know this
that we can have something like a 3d
printer where
the ink is single atoms and
you just assemble the atoms lego-like
into literally any device that you want
so you can create any resource you want
you can create any piece of technology
that you can think of anything you can
program the 3d printer to build
it will build in other words this thing
would be a a universal
constructor that would be able to build
anything including building things that
can build anything at all the universal
constructor
but of course we're not there yet in the
meantime
we're going to have the prophets and the
doomsayers and the naysayers and the
pessimists all
we have to deal with them we have to
deal with trying to
refute their claims that the catastrophe
is looming
and so that brings us to my favorite
uh i think my favorite anecdote in the
book
it's the one i use whenever anyone talks
about this particular point about the
scarcity of particular
resource and i like to counter with the
scarcity of
knowledge versus the bottomless pit
really that is our ignorance i shouldn't
say pit
it's just a well it's a well of
ignorance it's an infinite well of
ignorance we have an infinite amount of
ignorance but some people like to draw
from the well of ignorance
and try and plead for slowing down
progress
so that we don't get ahead of ourselves
unless we run out of some resource
they think that they've found is about
to run out
and and that deep well of ignorance is
an important well
today if you're a university phd student
working in
the natural sciences or the the
environmental sciences in particular
identifying any old thing that a
human civilization happens to be relying
on right now
calculating how much of known reserves
we have of that thing the rate at which
we're using it
and then of course concluding with a
prediction about
the horrors that are about to unfold
when the disaster strikes when we
actually run out of this thing
so this is effectively refuted by
what we're about to talk about here and
what we might
subtitle the parable of european so
let's go to that now
and david writes a few years later a
graduate student in the then
new subject of environmental science
explained to me that
colour television was a sign of the
imminent collapse of our consumer
society
why because first of all he said it
served no useful purpose
all the useful functions of television
could be performed just as well in
monochrome
adding color at several times the cost
was merely
conspicuous consumption that term had
been coined by the economist
thorstein veblen in 1902 a couple of
decades before even monochrome
television was invented
it meant wanting new possessions in
order to show off to the neighbours
that we had now reached the physical
limit of conspicuous consumption could
be proved
said my colleague by analyzing the
resource constraints scientifically
the cathode ray tubes in colour
televisions depended upon the element
europium to make the red phosphors on
the screen
europium is one of the rarest elements
on earth the planet's total known
reserves were only enough to build a few
hundred million more
televisions after that it would be back
to monochrome
but worse think what this would mean
from then on there will be two kinds of
people
those with color televisions and those
without and the same would be true of
everything else that was being consumed
it would be a world with permanent class
distinction in which the elites would
hoard the last of the resources
and live lives of gordy display while to
sustain that illusory state through its
final years
everyone else would be laboring on in
drab resentment
and so it went on nightmare built upon
nightmare
paul's there just my reflection quickly
um
notice how this is de rigueur it is so
common today it is just
what intellectuals say especially with
the advent of
any any technology but particularly ai
if ai comes along
there will be the haves the people who
can afford the ais and who
never need to work ever again and those
who can't afford the ais and no longer
have any jobs because the ais have long
since taken them
there will be two kinds of people in the
world the habs and the have nots the
the the ai quadrillionaires
and the people who are unemployed and
destitute then also think of
any medical technology the favorite one
that
people refer to these days of course any
longevity
type medicine any kind of technology
that might come along and increase our
lifespan
by a significant amount you know let's
say you have this pill
that can cure all the ills
let's say that might kill you within
an additional 200 years so anyone who
can afford to buy this pill can live
between 200 and 300 years well we're
going to have two sorts of people to
begin with aren't we we're going to have
the people who can afford this pill
which no doubt
these evil pharmaceutical companies are
going to charge people
untold millions of dollars in order to
get a hold of this pill so they can live
forever and the other people
they won't they won't be able to afford
it at all and they'll have to die early
in fact the cost of medicine just might
generally go up because the rich people
who live forever are going to demand
all the additional treatments and
resources from medical facilities and so
on and so forth
no one ever acknowledges the fact that
whenever a new technology comes out of
course
of course there is a transition period a
short increasingly short
transition period where yes only the
very wealthy can afford it only the very
wealthy can travel into space at the
moment
commercially but eventually the price
comes down it used to be the case that
the first automobiles could only be
afforded by the most wealthy in the
world
it used to be the case that only the
most wealthy in the world
could afford the most fashionable
clothes and so on and so forth this has
always been the case the first computers
the first home computers were only owned
by the most wealthy
but the costs come down the cost will
always come down
but you need to have this initial
investment by the most wealthy people
it is good and right and in a certain
sense heroic for the wealthy people to
try out these new technologies first
to pay a premium for them so that then
the economies of scale kick in and
everyone can eventually afford it
look at mobile phones okay let's go back
to the book where again just to recap
david is talking about how
european was about to run out according
to his colleague this other student
who's studying environmental science
and he writes of his colleague
i asked him how he knew that no new
source of european would be discovered
he asked how i knew that it would and
even if it were
what would we do then i asked how he
knew that color cathode ray tubes
could not be built without europium he
assured me that they could not it was a
miracle that there existed
even one element with the necessary
properties after all
why should nature supply elements with
properties to suit our convenience
i had to concede the point there aren't
that many elements and each of them has
only a few energy levels
that could be used to emit light no
doubt they had all been assessed by
physicists
if the bottom line was that there was no
alternative to europium for making
colour televisions
then there was no alternative yet
something deeply puzzled me about that
miracle of the red phosphor if nature
provides only one pair of suitable
energy levels
why does it provide even one i had not
yet heard of the fine tuning problem
it was new at the time but this was
puzzling for a similar reason
transmitting accurate images in real
time is a natural thing for people to
want to do
like traveling fast it would not have
been puzzling if the laws of physics
forbade it
just as they do forbid faster than light
travel for them
to allow it but only if one knew how
would be normal too but for them only
just
to allow it would be a fine-tuning
coincidence why would the laws of
physics draw the line so
close to a point that happened to have
significance for human technology
it would be as if the center of the
earth had turned out to be within a few
kilometers of the center of the universe
it seemed to violate the principle of
mediocrity
what made this even more puzzling was
that as with the real fine-tuning
problem
my colleague was claiming that there
were many such coincidences his whole
point was that the colour television
problem
was just one representative instance of
a phenomenon that was happening
simultaneously in many areas of
technology
the ultimate limits were being reached
just as we were using up the last stocks
of the rarest of rare earth elements for
the frivolous purpose
of watching soap operas in color so
everything that looked like progress
was actually just an insane rush to
exploit the last resources left on our
planet
the 1970s were he believed a unique
and terrible moment in history he was
right in one respect
no alternative red phosphor has been
discovered to this day
yet as i write this chapter i see before
me a superbly colored computer display
that contains not one atom of europium
its pixels a liquid crystal consisting
entirely of common elements and it does
not require a cathode ray tube
nor would it matter even if it did for
by now enough europium has been mined to
supply
every human being on earth with a dozen
european type screens
and the known reserves of the element
comprise several times that amount
even while my pessimistic colleague was
dismissing colour television technology
as useless and doomed optimistic people
were discovering new ways of achieving
it and new uses for it uses that he
thought he had ruled out by considering
for five minutes
how well colour televisions could do the
existing job of monochrome ones
but what stands out for me is not the
failed prophecy and its underlying
fallacy
nor relief that the nightmare never
happened it is the contrast between two
different conceptions of what
people are in the pessimistic conception
they are wasters
they take precious resources and madly
convert them into useless colored
pictures
this is true of static societies those
statues really were what my colleague
thought colour televisions are
which is why comparing our society with
the old culture of easter island is
exactly wrong
in the optimistic conception the one
that was unforeseeably vindicated by
events
people are problem solvers creators of
the unsustainable solution
and hence also of the next problem in
the pessimistic conception
that distinctive ability of people is a
disease for which sustainability is the
cure
in the optimistic one sustainability is
the disease
and people are the cure pause there
my reflection that is beautiful
wonderful and needs to somehow
permeate the zeitgeist it really does of
all the messages here
the counter cultural message is that
people are the solution or the cure it
is it is only people that will
solve the problems of tomorrow only
people people are not the problem
overpopulation is not the problem it's
insufficient numbers of people that's a
problem
because people are the things that
generate ideas we need more ideas we
need creative people
to come up with solutions to our most
pressing problems
they're not causing them at least
they're not causing worse problems okay
every solution that a person finds is
going to generate new problems but those
problems are better more interesting
more fun
they enable us to explore a greater
range of possibilities
and to do away with the problems that
cause us suffering
we need more people to cure the diseases
that
we're going to discover tomorrow as well
as the ones we already know of today
we need people to figure out new
resources as other ones begin to be
depleted we need people
to figure out new technologies so that
we can communicate better so we can
travel faster
and so on and so forth people are the
solution
they provide the solutions the only
thing that provide the solutions the
problems
the worst problems are those ones thrown
at
thrown at us by a hostile universe it's
the
universe that's not really helping us
out we have to eke out our existence as
i continue to say
we are the ones just scratching the
surface
of a reality which is
ever more unexpectedly throwing
floods fires earthquakes
natural disasters diseases comets
cosmological events etc and so forth
okay so if
we don't want to go the way of the
dinosaur and if we don't want indeed
other species to go the way of the
dinosaur
we'd better have more people working
faster not to
sustain the way things are not to try
and ensure that
resources don't become depleted or that
pollution isn't created
these are inevitable inevitable problems
problems are inevitable
but as we know all the way back in
chapter one these inevitable problems
have solutions if we try to find them if
we
put effort into finding them and if we
encourage people to find
those solutions rather than having
people fixate upon problems
and all the ways in which we can slow
down progress because
in this ridiculous pessimistic world
view it is
faster and faster progress that leads us
closer and closer to
the end times and that's precisely the
wrong way to think about it
end times become closer and closer the
more we slow down the more we try and
ensure that what we do is sustainable in
the environmental sense
we need fast progress and error
correction we need
knowledge creation we need more people
okay back to the book just reading the
last
bit there david said quote
in the optimistic one sustainability is
the disease and people are the cure
since then whole new industries have
come into existence
to harness great waves of innovation and
in many of those from medical imaging to
video games to desktop publishing to
nature documentaries like attenborough's
color television proved to be very
useful after all
and far from there being a permanent
class distinction between monochrome
and color television users the
monochrome technology is now
practically extinct as are cathode ray
televisions
color displays are now so cheap that
they are being given away with magazines
as advertising gimmicks
and all those technologies far from
being divisive
are inherently egalitarian sweeping away
many formerly entrenched barriers to
people's access to information
opinion art and education just pause
there and just a little comment on that
color televisions are becoming so
inexpensive and the associated
technology is so inexpensive
audio systems huge flat screen
televisions
that going to the cinema is becoming
redundant who would have thought of that
i mean you can have a cinema experience
inside your house you can
exceed what a cinema can do in many many
cases so you can have your own
projector and your own sound system in
the comfort of your own home
for a fraction of the cost overall as to
what frequently going to the cinema
would have been in days gone by
and yet this is not undermining the
movie industry
or at least that that the the the audio
visual
industry there is a renaissance of a
kind with television
all of the ways in which people who we
thought were going to lose their jobs
because
people weren't going to the movies
anymore have more jobs than ever all the
people who are
actors and who work on sound and vision
and whatever else
they now have many new avenues
on many different streaming services
sort of making movies of
and television shows of higher quality
than ever before the art is improving
because the technology is improving
and becoming cheaper and all boats are
rising with that tide
let's keep going david writes optimistic
proponents of malthusian arguments are
often
rightly keen to stress that all evils
are due to lack of knowledge and that
problems are soluble
prophecies of disaster such as the ones
i have described
do illustrate the fact that the
prophetic mode of thinking no matter how
plausible it seems
prospectively is fallacious and
inherently biased
however to expect that problems will
always be solved in time to avert
disasters would be the same fallacy
and indeed the deeper and more dangerous
mistake made by malthusians
is that they claim to have a way of
averting resource allocation disasters
namely sustainability thus they also
deny
that oth that other great truth that
i've suggested that we engravenstone
problems are inevitable just pausing
there just my reflection on this now
having heard
um david be interviewed many times over
the years now about the beginning of
infinity
one of the common
misunderstandings that people seem to
have on this point is
the idea that problems are soluble which
is true problems are soluble that this
somehow means
it is inevitable that the problems will
be solved and that progress is
inevitable this is not what's being
claimed and david has never said this
but it is
a very common misunderstanding of this
entire thesis
we have to work hard to solve problems
and because problems are inevitable
that doesn't that that undermines this
thesis that therefore progress is
inevitable
no there can be prop there will be
problems coming along and if we don't
choose to work really
hard to try and solve these problems
then progress will falter
it will stop we can go the way of the
dinosaur there's nothing in
this world view of david deutsch that
says we cannot go extinct
he can't say whether we will go extinct
or not no one can say we will go extinct
or not
but he's saying there's a possibility
that we won't go extinct we could
be the first it is certain
as certain as anything can be that
well given our current knowledge we can
predict
that absent us absent human beings
every species that exists on this planet
will go extinct absolutely
absolutely we know okay if it's not
going to be
the sun expanding into a red giant and
evaporating all the oceans and consuming
the earth in a massive fireball
then other asteroids will hit other
comets will hit
a supernova will go off nearby a massive
volcano will go off something will
happen
that will wipe out all life on earth it
will it is going to happen
but the fact that we're here means that
there's a chance
that not only will that not happen but
that we will be the ones
who are able to survive maybe we'll
leave the earth behind maybe
but we can survive if we choose
to create knowledge and if we choose to
solve the problems in time
but there's no guarantee of that at all
david has been at pain to say that
there's no guarantee of this
it's just that we have the chance of
doing so a chance
that no other species hitherto has ever
had
we are the one possible possible
exception to the rule
so we need to emphasize that problems
are soluble
but it's not inevitable that they will
be solved it's only inevitable they will
arise
and that if we want to we can try and
solve them okay
back to the book and he writes on this
point
a solution may be problem free for a
period
and in a parochial application but there
is no way of identifying in advance
which problems will have a solution
hence there is no way short of stasis to
avoid
unforeseen problems arising from new
solutions but stasis itself is
unsustainable
as witnessed every static society in
history malthus could not have known
that the obscure element uranium which
had just been discovered
would eventually become relevant to the
survival of civilization
just as my colleague could not have
known that within his lifetime
color televisions would be saving lives
every day
so there is no resource management
strategy that can prevent disasters
just as there is no political system
that provides only good leaders
and good policies not a scientific
method that provides only true theories
but there are ideas that reliably cause
disasters
and one of them is notoriously the idea
that the future can be scientifically
planned
the only rational policy in all three
cases is to judge institutions
plans and ways of life according to how
good they are at correcting mistakes
removing bad policies
and leaders superseding bad explanations
and recovering from disasters
okay now i'm skipping a bit in this
chapter and
david talks about how for a whole bunch
of solutions
there's always been the naysayers so
antibiotics
you know someone will say oh this is
only temporary antibiotics which kill
bacteria
just you wait just you wait until the
the antibiotic resistant pathogens come
along then we'll be in trouble
and so people like to talk about how all
we're ever doing is postponing disaster
for every solution i'll just you wait
um something will come along which for
which we will have no solution
and so i'm skipping that let's just go
to where he talks
briefly about climate change where he
says
quote we face the prospect that carbon
dioxide emissions from technology will
cause an increase in the average
temperature of the atmosphere
with harmful effects such as droughts
sea level rises disruption to
agriculture and the extinctions of some
species
these are forecast to outweigh the
beneficial effects such as
an increase in crop yields a general
boost to plant life and a reduction in
the number of people dying of
hypothermia in winter
trillions of dollars and a great deal of
legislation and institutional change
intended to reduce those emissions
currently hang on the outcomes of
simulations
of the planet's climate by the most
powerful supercomputers and
on projections by economists about what
those computations imply about the
economy in the next century
in light of the above discussion we
should notice several things about the
controversy
and about the underlying problem first
we have been lucky so far
regardless of how accurate the
prevailing climate models are
it is uncontroversial from the laws of
physics without any need for
supercomputers
or sophisticated modeling that such
emissions must
eventually increase the temperature
which must eventually be harmful
consider therefore one of the relevant
parameters had just been slightly
different
and the moment of disaster had been in
say 1902
webland's time when carbon dioxide
emissions were already orders of
magnitude above their pre-enlightenment
values
then the disaster would have happened
before anyone could have predicted it
or known what was happening sea levels
would have risen
agriculture would have been disrupted
millions would have begun to die
with worse to come and the great issue
of the day would have been
not how to prevent it but what could be
done about it
they had no supercomputers then because
of babbage's failures and the scientific
community's misjudgments and perhaps
most importantly their lack of wealth
they lacked the vital technology of
automated computing altogether
mechanical calculators and roomfuls of
clerks would have been insufficient
but much worse they had almost no
atmospheric physicists
in fact the total number of physicists
of all kinds was a small fraction of the
number who today
work on climate change alone from
society's stand point of view
physicists were a luxury in 1902 like
colour televisions were in the 1970s
yet to recover from the disaster society
would have needed more scientific
knowledge
and better technology and more of it
that is to say
more wealth for instance in 1900
building a sea wall to protect the coast
of a low-lying island would have
required resources so enormous that the
only islands that could have afforded it
would have been those with either large
concentrations of cheap labor
or exceptional wealth as in the
netherlands much of whose population
already lived below
sea level thanks to the technology of
dike building this is a challenge that
is highly susceptible to automation
but people were in no position to
address it in that way all relevant
machines were underpowered unreliable
expensive and impossible to produce in
large numbers an enormous effort to
construct a panama canal had just
failed with the loss of thousands of
lives and vast amounts of money
due to inadequate technology and
scientific knowledge
and to compound those problems the world
as a whole had very little wealth by
today's standards
today a coastal defense project would be
well within the capabilities of almost
any coastal nation
and would add decades to the time
available to find other solutions to
rising sea levels
if none are found what would we do then
that is a question of a wholly different
kind which brings me to my second
observation on the climate change
controversy
it is that while the supercomputer
stimulations make
conditional predictions the economic
forecasts
make almost pure prophecies for we can
expect the future of human responses
to climate to depend heavily on how
successful people
are at creating new knowledge to address
the problems that arise
so comparing predictions with prophecies
is going to lead to that same old
mistake
it's pausing there just my reflection
just we really need to emphasize this so
there are scientific predictions of what
is going to happen
with climate change scientific
predictions derivations from good
explanations
using supercomputer modelling of course
there's going to be errors with these
and yes they change now and again but
this does not
change the fact that there really is a
scientific theory
about how for example certain gases
like carbon dioxide like methane really
do
interact with certain kinds of
light so for example the bonds when the
carbon dioxide molecule
just happened to be right to resonate
with certain photons of light and they
re-emit that light in all directions
including towards the ground
um as infrared radiation and so this
causes we know the mechanisms that cause
climate change it really
is a real thing and you really can make
reasonable predictions about these
things all that aside
putting all of that aside knowing that
climate change is a real phenomenon
and it really is affected by the burning
of fossil fuels
for example those predictions are in a
completely different category to what
will happen
economically as a consequence of
that possible natural disaster
what would be a natural disaster if we
didn't do anything about it
but we will do something about it as it
becomes
more clear to politicians industry
leaders and so on and so forth
things will be done things are being
done already but
trying to suggest that this is going to
mean
economic tragedy that it's going to
require
certain economic tweaks and changes to
the economy
is all based upon not scientific
prediction
but upon pure guesswork pessimistic
guesswork
about the future ways in which people
will trade one with another
but this is to do with their free
choices and what knowledge they'll
create
so let's go back to the book and david
writes again
suppose that disaster had already been
underway in 1902
consider what it would have taken for
scientists to forecast say
carbon dioxide emissions for the 20th
century on the shaky assumption
that energy use would continue to
increase by roughly the same exponential
factor as before
they could have estimated the resulting
increase in emissions
but that estimate would not have
included the effects of nuclear power
it could not have because radioactivity
itself had only just been discovered
and will not be harnessed for power
until the middle of the century
but suppose that somehow they had been
able to foresee that
then they might have modified their
carbon dioxide forecast and concluded
that emissions
could easily be restored to below the
1902 level by the end of the century
but again that would only be because
they could not possibly foresee
the campaign against nuclear power which
would put a stop to its expansion
ironically on environmental grounds
before it ever became a significant
factor in reducing emissions
and so on time and again the
unpredictable factor
of new human ideas both good and bad
would make the scientific prediction
useless
the same is bound to be true even more
so of forecast today
for the coming century which brings me
to my third observation about the
current controversy
it is not yet accurately known how
sensitive the atmosphere's temperature
is to the concentration of carbon
dioxide that is how much
a given increase in concentration
increases the temperature this number is
important politically
because it affects how urgent the
problem is high sensitivity means high
urgency
low sensitivity means the opposite
unfortunately this has led to the
political debate being dominated by the
side issue of how
anthropogenic human caused the increase
in the temperature
to date has been it is as if people were
arguing about how best to prepare for
the next hurricane
while all agreeing that only the
hurricanes one should prepare for
are the human induced ones all sides
seem to assume
that if it turns out that a random
fluctuation in the temperature is about
to raise
sea levels disrupt agriculture wipe out
species and so on
our best plan would simply be to grin
and bear it or if two-thirds of the
increase is anthropogenic
we should not mitigate the effects of
the other third trying to predict
what our net effect on the environment
will be for the next century
and then subordinating all policy
decisions to optimizing that prediction
cannot work we cannot know how much to
reduce emissions by
nor how much effect that will have
because we cannot know the future
discoveries
that will make some of our present
actions seem wise
some counterproductive and some
irrelevant nor how much our efforts are
going to be assisted or impeded
by sheer luck tactics to delay the onset
of foreseeable problems may help
but they cannot replace and must be
subordinate to
increasing our ability to intervene
after events turn out as we did not
foresee
if that does not happen in regard to
carbon dioxide induced warming
it will happen with something else
indeed we did not foresee the global
warming disaster
i call it a disaster because the
prevailing theory is that our best
option
is to prevent carbon dioxide emissions
by spending vast sums and enforcing
severe worldwide restrictions on
behaviour
and that is already a disaster by any
reasonable measure i call it unforeseen
because we now realize that it was
already underway even in 1971
when i attended that lecture ehrlich did
tell us that agriculture was soon going
to be devastated by rapid climate change
but the change in question was going to
be global cooling
caused by smog and the condensation
trails of supersonic aircraft
the possibility of warming caused by gas
emissions had already been mooted by
some scientists but ehrlich did not
consider it worth mentioning
he told us that the evidence was that a
general cooling trend had already begun
and that it would continue with
catastrophic effects though it would be
reversed in the very long term
because of heat pollution from industry
an effect that is currently at least a
hundred times smaller than the global
warming that
preoccupies us pausing my reflection a
planet like earth
geologically speaking is active
it's geologically active it's kind of
alive in a geological sense
the outgassing of volcanoes coupled with
rain which absorbs those gases in the
atmosphere and then causes
the acidification of oceans which can
then cause
precipitates to form at the bottom of
those oceans which are then carried into
the core of the earth and
uh then re-erupted back into the
atmosphere
by those same volcanoes this process
this
constant process this carbon cycle this
natural carbon carbon dioxide cycle
coupled with the way in which we
orbit the planet would mean that even if
even if there was no anthropogenic
climate change
there would nonetheless be climate
change it would be absolutely
astonishing
if the climate did not change if there
wasn't a trend of heating or cooling
so regardless of whether humans are
doing it or not regardless of that
let's say we find that there is climate
change but humans aren't doing anything
at all to contribute to it okay that's
not the case at the moment okay but
let's say that it was let's say that
scientists come to a consensus tomorrow
and the united nations begin to tell us
about how
hey guess what everyone the fossil fuel
thing uh
isn't what we thought it was there's no
human induced climate change
there would still be climate change okay
there'll be climate change via other
factors
and that climate change will eventually
cause problems for humans it'll either
cause the sea levels to rise or it will
cause the amount of ice to increase
it'll cause the temperature to change in
uncomfortable ways for people living in
certain places
and we should want to mitigate that we
should want to treat the planet like we
treat our homes
sometimes they're too cold sometimes
they're too warm we should want to
regardless of
whether humans are causing the climate
change or not want to control the
climate
and even if the almost impossible was
was to happen and
nothing ever changed on planet earth
with respect to the climate
we should still want to change the
climate we should still want to make the
places that are
uh barren fertile we should still want
to play
to change the uh certain places in the
polls which are too cold
to be somewhat warmer if we can do that
we should
this whole idea of living in a pristine
natural environment
we've counted that we don't like that
the natural environment is not a good
thing uh
even for the species that sort of evolve
there
because the environment is hostile
in very many ways okay so let's go back
to the book
um and david's about to write what he
says in one of his ted talks
quote he says there is a saying that an
ounce of prevention
equals a pound of cure but that is only
when one knows what to prevent
no precautions can avoid problems that
we do not yet foresee
to prepare for those there is nothing we
can do but increase our ability to put
things right if they go wrong
trying to rely on the sheer good luck of
avoiding bad outcomes indefinitely
would simply guarantee that we would
eventually fail
without the means of recovering the
world is currently buzzing with plans to
force reductions in gas emissions
at almost any cost but it ought to be
buzzing much more with plans to reduce
the temperature
or for how to thrive at a higher
temperature and not at all costs
but efficiently and cheaply some such
plans exist
for instance to remove carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere by a variety of
methods
and to generate clouds over the oceans
to reflect sunlight and to encourage
aquatic organisms to absorb more carbon
dioxide
but at the moment these are very minor
research efforts
neither supercomputers nor international
treaties nor vast sums are devoted to
them
they are not central to the human effort
to face this problem or problems like it
this is dangerous there is as yet no
serious sign of retreat into a
sustainable lifestyle
which would really mean achieving only
the semblance of sustainability
but even the aspiration is dangerous for
what would we be aspiring to
to forcing the future world into our
image endlessly reproducing our
lifestyle
our misconceptions and our mistakes for
what would we
be aspiring to to forcing the future
world
into our image endlessly reproducing our
lifestyle our misconceptions and our
mistakes
but if we choose instead to embark on an
open-ended journey of creation
and exploration whose every step is
unsustainable
until it is redeemed by the next if this
becomes the prevailing ethic
and aspiration of our society then the
ascent of man
the beginning of infinity will have
become if not secure
then at least sustainable the end of the
chapter
there we go a wonderful way to end it
the sustainability that we want the
sustainability we want
and need and require in order to survive
is constant change is this open-ended
journey of creation exploration
each step of which is unsustainable you
can't stay there at that step just doing
that same thing over and over again
it's not sustainable what is sustainable
is change
this rapid progress this journey of
creation and exploration
and so we come finally to chapter 18 to
the
conclusion of the book which i think
will take uh
some uh weeks to get through
there will be many episodes based on the
beginning
which is chapter 18 and it's it's
appropriate that it's called the
beginning because this is
as i've said before the the beginning of
the beginning of infinity the beginning
of
spreading these ideas of finding new
ways in which to
promote the understandings and the
learnings that are within this book the
messages that are in this book because
this is civilization level important as
we've just
learned from that previous chapter we
need to counter
the prevailing narratives about all of
these topics
and it's simply a good way the book is a
good way
of having a touchstone a way of
summarizing what this world view is the
worldview is
clearly summarized and encapsulated
within the book but it's beyond the book
of course of course and
and there's many more people and
communities that need to spring up and
have an optimistic view of humanity and
problem solving
but for now until next time bye bye
just a thank you to my patreons and if
you'd like to become a
patreon of mine i would greatly
appreciate it you can find me at
patreon.com forward slash topcast or
simply google
topcast patreon or even brett hall
patreon
and something will come up there for you
or you can go to my own website
www.bretthall.org
and you will find a link there to a
paypal link and so you can donate
there's a donate button
and it is greatly welcome greatly
appreciated
any contributions that anyone can make
at whatever level
thank you so much until next time bye
[Music]
um
so
[Music]
up